---
author: jaimecgomezz
title: GIN Index
date: 21-11-2024
tags: [postgresql]
---

# GIN Index

Generalized Inverted Index. It's designed for handling cases where the items to be indexed are composite values, and the queries to be handled by the index need to search for element values that appear within composite items, e.g. documents that will be queried for specific words being contained.

We use the word `item` to refer to refer to a composite value that is to be indexed, and the word `key` to refer to an element value. GIN always stores and searches for `keys`, not `item` values per se.

A GIN index stores a set of `(key, posting list)` pairs, where a `posting list` is a set of row IDs in which the key occurs. The same row ID may appear in multiple `posting lists` since an item can contain more than one key. Each value is stored only once, so GIN index is very compact for cases where the same key appears many times.

- The initial motivation was full text search.

- The exact mapping of a column of a given data type is dependent on the GIN index operator class, i.e. a GIN index can have very different index contents depending on which data types and operator class you're using. Some data types, such as `JSONB` have more than one GIN operator class to support the most optimal index structure for specific query patterns.

- GIN indexes only support `Bitmap Index Scan`, due to the fact that the only store parts of the row values in each index page.

## Expensive updates

Given that a single row may cause 10s or 100s of rows to be updated, the `fastupdate` mechanism is enabled by default, causing updated to be deferred, so they can occur at a point where multiple updates have to be made, reducing the overhead for a single update, at the expense of having to do all the work at a later point.

### fastupdate

The data that is deferred is kept in the special `pending list`, which then get flushed to the main index structure in one of three situations:

1. The `gin_pending_list_limit` (4MB by default) is reached.
2. Explicit call to the `gin_clean_pending_list` function.
3. Autovacuum on the table with the GIN index.

This may cause that the Nth `INSERT` or `UPDATE` operation is suddenly a lot slower. The following are the some strategies that can help dealing with this issue:

1. Redice `gin_pending_list_limit` to have more frequent, smaller flushes
2. Turn off `fastupdate`, taking the overhead with each individual `INSERT/UPDATE`
3. Tune autovacuum to run more often on the table, in order to clean the pending list
4. Explicitly calling `gin_clean_pending_list`, instead of relying on autovacuum


## References

- [64.4. GIN Indexes](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/gin.html#GIN-BUILTIN-OPCLASSES-TABLE)
- [Understanding Postgres GIN Indexes: The Good and the Bad](https://pganalyze.com/blog/gin-index)
- [Reindex index_notes_on_note_trigram on notes table](gitlab-com/gl-infra/production#4725)
